

===== PAGE 1 =====
Multicondition and multimodal temporal profile
inference during mouse embryonic development
Ran Zhang,1,2 Chengxiang Qiu,1 Galina N. Filippova, 3 Gang Li,1,2
Jay Shendure,1,4,5,6,7 Jean-Philippe Vert,8 Xinxian Deng,3 William Stafford Noble, 1,9
and Christine M. Disteche 3,10
1Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA; 2eScience Institute, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA; 3Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington 98195, USA; 4Brotman Baty Institute for Precision Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195, USA; 5Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA; 6Allen Discovery Center for Cell Lineage Tracing,
Seattle, Washington 98109, USA; 7Seattle Hub for Synthetic Biology, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA;8Owkin, New York, New York
10010, USA; 9Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195,
USA; 10Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA
The emergence of single-cell time-series data sets enables modeling of changes in various types of cellular profiles over time.
However, because of the disruptive nature of single-cell measurements, it is impossible to capture the full temporal trajec-
tory of a particular cell. Furthermore, single-cell profiles can be collected at mismatched time points across different con-
ditions (e.g., sex, batch, disease) and data modalities (e.g., scRNA-seq, scATAC-seq), which makes modeling challenging.
Here, we propose a joint modeling framework, Sunbear, for integrating multicondition and multimodal single-cell profiles
across time. Sunbear can be used to impute single-cell temporal profile changes, align multi–data set and multimodal profiles
across time, and extrapolate single-cell profiles in a missing modality. We apply Sunbear to reveal sex-biased transcription
during mouse embryonic development and predict dynamic relationships between epigenetic priming and transcription for
cells in which multimodal profiles are unavailable. Sunbear thus enables the projection of single-cell time-series snapshots to
multimodal and multicondition views of cellular trajectories.
[Supplemental material is available for this article.]
Rapidly improving single-cell sequencing technologies now allows
us to characterize diverse and dynamic cellular processes. Multi-
modal time-series measurements of a population of cells can pro-
file changes in gene expression, chromatin accessibility and
structure, and DNA methylation as the cells carry out essential bi-
ological functions, differentiate, traverse the cell cycle, degenerate,
or undergo stages of disease progression.
Although such measurements have proven to be immensely
valuable, they suffer from a fundamental limitation: Because se-
quencing measurements are usually disruptive, it is impossible to
trace a given cell ’s behavior across time. In addition, single-cell
profile inference suffers from heterogeneity of biological samples
(e.g., female vs. male, disease vs. control) and data types (e.g.,
scRNA-seq, scATAC-seq), as well as limited sample availability.
Consequently, a method capable of accurately imputing unob-
served single-cell measurements—essentially answering questions
such as, “what would the gene expression of this particular cell
be if we had measured it at a different time point, or in a different
experimental condition, or using a different measurement modal-
ity?”—would be immensely valuable in understanding the tempo-
ral dynamics and regulation of the behaviors of individual cells
across biological conditions.
Many analytical techniques have been developed to model
temporal processes from single-cell data. For example, pseudo-
time-based methods infer the ordering of cells along a one-dimen-
sional or branching trajectory (Trapnell et al. 2014; Tanay and
Regev 2017; Saelens et al. 2019). However, these methods do not
perform imputation per se, and the relationship between the in-
ferred pseudotime and actual time is left unspecified. Methods us-
ing RNA velocity to derive single-cell trajectories assume that
nascent RNAs represent the future state of a cell (Lange et al.
2022; Li et al. 2023). However, RNA velocity can be noisy and can-
not be applied to other data modalities, and these methods are fo-
cused on ranking cells instead of predicting cellular profiles in
missing time points.
In this work, we focus on methods that are specifically de-
signed to integrate and extrapolate single-cell time-series measure-
ments (Table 1). For example, optimal transport-based methods,
such as Waddington-OT (Schiebinger et al. 2019), TrajectoryNet
(Tong et al. 2020), and TIGON (Sha et al. 2024), operate on pairs
of measurements in a time-series, with the goal of aligning cells
from two neighboring time points under the assumption that a sin-
gle cell ’s profile changes minimally between time points.
Alternatively, neural ordinary/stochastic differential equation
(ODE/SDE)–based methods, such as PRESCIENT (Yeo et al. 2021),
RNAForecaster (Erbe et al. 2023), MIOFlow (Huguet et al. 2022),
FBSDE (Zhang et al. 2024b), and scNODE (Zhang et al. 2024a),
Corresponding authors: cdistech@uw.edu, wnoble@uw.edu,
dengx2@uw.edu
Article published online before print. Article, supplemental material, and publi-
cation date are at https://www.genome.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gr.279997.124.
Freely available online through the Genome Research Open Access option.
© 2025 Zhang et al. This article, published in Genome Research, is available un-
der a Creative Commons License (Attribution 4.0 International), as described at
http:/ /creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Method
35:2339–2351 Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; ISSN 1088-9051/25; www.genome.org Genome Research 2339
www.genome.org

===== PAGE 2 =====
assume that each cell develops autonomously and that the cell ’s
future state is determined based on the cell ’s current expression
profile. Autoencoder models either assume that time is an additive
variable in the embedding space (Lotfollahi et al. 2023) or are cou-
pled with optimal transport or ODE-based methods to optimize
nonlinear cell projection and cross-time alignment (Tong et al.
2020; Huguet et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2024a). Graph-based meth-
ods, such as GraphFP (Jiang et al. 2022), perform dynamic inference
on top of cell graphs. However, most of these existing methods are
focused on a single data modality (e.g., single-cell RNA-seq) or bio-
logical condition. Recently, Moscot.time was proposed to jointly
perform optimal transport on multiomics data (Klein et al. 2025).
However, optimal-transport-based methods are aimed at matching
cells between time points but not temporal profile inference at
missing time points. To our knowledge and as shown in Table 1,
no existing method is designed to predict temporal profiles of sin-
gle cells at missing time points across conditions or modalities.
We thus set out to create a method that is capable of modeling
various types of cellular profiles —gene expression, chromatin ac-
cessibility, DNA methylation, etc. —while capturing trends over
time, between modalities, and across experimental conditions at
single-cell resolution. We were particularly interested in the
cross-modal setting in which, for example, one data modality is
“undercharacterized”; that is, we are missing measurements of
that modality in one or more conditions or time points of interest.
Although several existing methods have been developed for this
type of cross-modal inference, they were developed for bulk anal-
ysis and have not been evaluated in the single-cell setting. For ex-
ample, Sagittarius performs cross-species and cross-cell-line
inference of bulk transcriptomic profiles through a transformer
model (Woicik et al. 2023), and chronODE integrates bulk multio-
mics time-series data to model the temporal dynamics of gene and
chromatin features (Borsari et al. 2025).
Following the lead of several existing methods (Sohn et al.
2015; Lopez et al. 2018), we hypothesized that a type of deep neural
network known as a conditional variational autoencoder (cVAE)
should be capable of accurately modeling a time-series data set con-
sisting of multiple single-cell data conditions and modalities. Here,
we propose Sunbear, a cVAE that incorporates continuous-time em-
bedding to integrate data sets from unmatched time points and in-
fer temporal profiles at any intermediate time point.
Results
Sunbear model overview
Our aim was to produce a model that would take as input a time-
series of single-cell measurements from two or more different
data modalities and predict, for any cell in the input, its multimod-
al profile as if the cell had been measured at some other time point
(Fig. 1A). To accomplish this goal, we created Sunbear, which is a
cVAE that includes a continuous-time embedding and incorpo-
rates features within the model to enable cross-modality data set
matching (Fig. 1B). To provide additional flexibility, Sunbear also
includes embeddings to represent experimental or biological con-
ditions (e.g., sex, batch, or perturbations).
Intuitively, through the encoder framework, Sunbear learns
cell embeddings (default dimension: 50; see hyperparameter tun-
ing strategies in Methods subsection “Hyperparameter tuning ”)
that represent cell identities while ensuring that these embeddings
are conditionally independent of the time, study conditions, and
batch effects. To take advantage of the continuous nature of
time and enable learning diverse temporal patterns, Sunbear incor-
porates a time factor using a sinusoidal encoding (default dimen-
sion: 50). A time-aware cell embedding is then learned by
integrating cell identity and time information, which is further
projected back to the original gene expression space through a
decoder. Critically, Sunbear is capable of learning nonlinear rela-
tionships between time and cell embedding, because the model
is optimized to reconstruct accurate cellular profiles for all cells
across all time points (Methods subsection “Modeling scRNA-seq
temporal profiles”).
In the multimodal setup, a second cVAE is built for scATAC-
seq data. To ensure accurate cross-modality integration and infer-
ence, Sunbear forces cell embedding alignment between data mo-
dalities. Furthermore, to augment temporal inference in the data
modality when sparser time points observed (i.e., scATAC-seq in
our example), Sunbear forces the temporal interaction layer
(Fig. 1B, light green box) to be shared between modalities, with
the assumption that the interaction effect among cell, time,
and condition should not vary based on the data type a cell is
measured in.
Once the model is trained, we can continuously vary the time
factor to infer smooth trajectories in cellular profiles across time.
Furthermore, because Sunbear can be jointly optimized on multi-
modal profiles, we can couple encoders of, for example, gene ex-
pression (scRNA-seq) with decoders of chromatin accessibility
(scATAC-seq) to enable the prediction of missing scATAC-seq pro-
files across time (Fig. 1C).
Sunbear can predict a cell ’s transcriptional profile at missing
time points and missing conditions
Because of the lack of ground-truth measurements of a cell ’se x -
pression changes across time, we first carried out a simulation
study to make sure Sunbear can capture different temporal trends
Table 1. Methods for integrating and extrapolating single-cell time-series data
OT ODE AE OT/ODE+AE Graph Multimodal OT Sunbear
Optimized in the original data space ✓✓ ✓
Learns from distal time points ✓✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Does not require cell-type labels ✓✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Corrects for batch effects ✓
Models multimodal data ✓✓
Performs imputation on missing conditions ✓✓ ✓
Performs imputation on missing modalities ✓
(OT) Optimal transport, (ODE) ordinary differential equations, and (AE) autoencoder.
Zhang et al.
2340 Genome Research
www.genome.org

===== PAGE 3 =====
at single-cell resolution. In this simulation study, we are interested
in testing two aspects of the model.
First, given diverse temporal patterns of gene expression
and noisy single-cell measurements, can Sunbear recapitulate
single-cell gene expression changes across time? To achieve this
goal, we simulated a data set with a relatively large amount of
noise (standard deviation of three) and no pseudotime differenc-
es among cells (time delay: zero) ( Supplemental Methods,
“Simulation studies”). We then trained Sunbear on the resulting
data set. For the prediction, we started with a single cell ’s profile
from time 0 and varied the time encoding to predict the cell ’s cor-
responding profile at continuous time points. We then visualized
randomly selected genes ’ expression changes ( Supplemental Fig.
S1). Our result suggests that Sunbear is able to capture temporal
patterns of gene expression across different cell types and genes.
Next, we are interested in testing whether Sunbear can reca-
pitulate the heterogeneous nature of cell types at single-cell resolu-
tion. For each cell type and each time point, we assume that 100
cells have unsynchronized pseudotimes, in which each pair of
neighboring cells differs by 0.002 days, and there is a total of 0.2
day differences in pseudotime. We set the standard deviation of
noise to one to prevent the noise overriding the signal of cellular
differences. In this case, we systematically compared the perfor-
mance of Sunbear and baseline predictions on each held-out
time point, 6.75, 7.25, 7.75, and 8.25, across all genes and cells
(Supplemental Methods, “Simulation studies”). Overall, our simu-
lation results suggest that Sunbear can accurately capture individ-
ual cell-level differences ( Supplemental Fig. S2 ).
We then set out to test Sunbear’s ability to predict a cell’s gene
expression profile at missing time points. For this analysis, we used
a set of 1 million cells randomly sampled from our recently pub-
lished time-series mouse embryonic development data set, which
consists of 12 million cells collected at 67 time points from embry-
onic day (E) 8 through E18.75 (Fig. 2A; Qiu et al. 2024). To validate
Sunbear’s performance at cross-time and cross-condition predic-
tion, we held out one time point at a time and trained a model
on the remaining time points (see the Methods subsection
“scRNA-seq temporal inference evaluation ”). In Sunbear, the
time point ’s information is encoded in a latent “time” factor,
which is concatenated with the cell identity factor to impute the
scRNA-seq profile of each cell. The model ’s training procedure is
designed to encourage the cell identity factors to be invariant of
time. Therefore, by fixing the cell factors and varying the time fac-
tors, we can predict scRNA-seq profiles in a missing time point.
To quantitatively evaluate Sunbear’s prediction performance,
we would ideally like to measure Sunbear’s ability to predict how a
single cell ’s expression profile changes across time. However,
because single cells are destroyed after sequencing, this type of
evaluation is impossible. We therefore adopted an alternative ap-
proach that relies upon the cell-type annotations created by the
authors of the original study. These annotations allow us to ask
how well each cell-type-specific pseudobulk profile predicted in
the missing time point agrees with the true cell-type-specific pseu-
dobulk profile that is held out from training (see the Methods sub-
section “scRNA-seq temporal inference evaluation ”).
Specifically, to validate Sunbear ’s performance on temporal
inference, we asked whether the profile of each cell in the held-
out time point can be recapitulated by using cells from the corre-
sponding cell type at a neighboring time point. To do that, we
compared Sunbear’s prediction (i.e., by varying the time factor of
the query cell type at a neighboring time point to the held-out
time point) with the baseline prediction, which is the pseudobulk
profile of cells in the time point immediately before or after the
held-out time point. Even though Sunbear did not see the cell-
type information during training, it was able to predict scRNA-
seq profiles in an unseen time point better than the baseline
AB C
Figure 1. Sunbear framework. ( A) Sunbear takes as input a collection of measurements of single cells at multiple time points in two or more biological
conditions (top) or data modalities ( bottom). (B) During the training phase, Sunbear learns to decompose the original time-series profiles into four com-
ponents: cell embedding, time point, batch, and condition. Batch and condition factors are represented by one-hot encodings. The time factor is repr e-
sented by a sinusoidal encoding. The cell embedding is learned from the original profile and is conditionally independent of the other factors. In the
multimodal setting, cell identities are aligned between data modalities. ( C) In the prediction phase, Sunbear concatenates the query cell ’s identity factor
while varying other factors to impute the cell ’s profile across time and conditions. By sharing cell embeddings across modalities, Sunbear allows joint tem-
poral modeling of multimodal profiles.
Temporal profile inference in mouse development
Genome Research 2341
www.genome.org

===== PAGE 4 =====
methods in the majority of cell types and time points (Fig. 2B,
“cross-time”; Fig. 2C).
In addition to modeling a continuous variable such as time,
Sunbear is capable of modeling discrete factors corresponding to
various types of experimental conditions. This functionality al-
lows us to swap the condition factor to predict a cell ’s profile in a
missing time point and in a different condition, thus making di-
rect comparisons of gene expression profiles across sexes. We
used this functionality to predict sex-specific single-cell profiles
at missing time points (Fig. 2B, “cross-sex”). To evaluate our mod-
el’s performance, we held out each time point and sex at a time,
and we used profiles from the opposite sex to recapitulate the
held-out profile. Sunbear is able to predict scRNA-seq profiles in
an unseen time point in the opposite sex, with significant im-
provement compared with using baseline models of the previous
and/or subsequent time points in the held-out sex (Fig. 2D,E).
To test whether Sunbear can operate on data sets with sparser
time points, we performed two additional experiments: (1) itera-
tively holding out the target time point ’s neighboring one, two,
or three time points ( Supplemental Fig. S3 ) and (2) making the
data sets sparser with gaps of 0.5, 0.75, and 1 day ( Supplemental
Fig. S4 ). Our result shows that the method is robust to data with
sparser time points.
Furthermore, we compared Sunbear with TrajectoryNet on
the sparser data set with a 0.75 day time gap. This analysis showed
that Sunbear also outperforms TrajectoryNet in inferring the held-
out time point profile ( Supplemental Fig. S5 ; Supplemental
Methods, “Comparison with TrajectoryNet”).
We further used Sunbear to integrate three sets of single-cell
RNA-seq time-series profiles (Cao et al. 2019; Pijuan-Sala et al.
2019; Qiu et al. 2022). To assess how well the integration worked,
we quantified LISI scores (Korsunsky et al. 2019) between each pair
of neighboring time points, as well as between data sets collected
at matched time points. Our results suggest that Sunbear can accu-
rately align single-cell time-series profiles across time points and
batches (Supplemental Fig. S6 ).
Finally, we performed several ablation studies on different
parts of the model. To assess the contribution of the sinusoidal en-
coding of time information, we compared Sunbear with a variant
of Sunbear that encoded time factor as a single value representing
A
B
D
C
E
Figure 2. Single-cell profile inference across time and conditions. ( A) Sunbear is trained on scRNA-seq profiles of whole-mouse embryos collected at al-
ternating sexes along developmental time points (Qiu et al. 2024). ( B) Sunbear is validated in three scenarios. In each scenario, one data block is held out
from the training, and Sunbear is used to predict the profile of the missing block based on cells in the query block (outlined in turquoise). Sunbear ’s pre-
diction is compared against the baselines using the held-out block ’s nearest existing measurements with the desired sex factors. The pseudobulk Pearson ’s
correlation per major cell trajectory is calculated between the held-out profile and predictions/baselines. ( C) Cross-time evaluation: query and baseline are
selected either from the closest previous time point ( left) or from the closest subsequent time point ( right). The pseudobulk Pearson ’s correlation between
the original held-out profile and predicted ( y-axis) and baselines ( x-axis) is plotted for each major cell trajectory in each held-out time point. Each dot rep-
resents a cell trajectory per held-out time point, and numbers indicate the number of dots above and below the diagonal line. P-values are calculated by a
one-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test. ( D) Cross-sex prediction: similar to that in C, except query cells are selected from the opposite sex to the held-out data.
(E) Cross-sex prediction: similar to that inD, except we enforce a strict baseline model by taking the mean of the previous and subsequent time point per cell
trajectory.
Zhang et al.
2342 Genome Research
www.genome.org

===== PAGE 5 =====
the actual time point. We observed decreased temporal inference
performance in the latter scenario ( Supplemental Fig. S7A,C,E ).
Similarly, removing the condition factor decreases the perfor-
mance of temporal inference ( Supplemental Fig. S7B,D,F ). When
removing the batch factor from the model, we observed a misalign-
ment of cell identity factors across different data sets, compared
with well-aligned cell identity factors from the original Sunbear
model ( Supplemental Fig. S8 ). These results suggest the impor-
tance of explicitly encoding condition and batch factors and rep-
resenting time with a sinusoidal encoding.
Sunbear reveals sexual dimorphism in gene expression during
mouse embryonic development
Having established Sunbear ’s ability to capture sex differences in
gene expression, we used the model to investigate sex-specific
transcriptional differences during mouse embryonic develop-
ment. Because only one sex is profiled at most time points, it is im-
possible to directly perform differential expression analysis
between sexes at individual time points. Therefore, for each cell,
we swapped the sex factor and calculated differential gene expres-
sion between sexes (see the Methods subsection “Predicting tran-
scriptional sex differences across time ”).
We performed two types of validation of the transcriptional
sex-difference predictions, taking advantage of the three time
points (E13, E13.25, E13.75) for which the original data include
both female and male samples. Specifically, we performed evalua-
tion on each cell type that has more than 1000 cells profiled across
the three time points. First, we compared our prediction against
the differential expression pattern between sexes calculated based
on the original data at each sex-matched time point. For each of
the three time points, we used the area under the receiver operat-
ing characteristic curve (AUROC) to assess the extent to which
Sunbear’s sex-difference prediction identifies the female- and
male-biased genes derived from the original data set. As a baseline,
we used the differential expression pattern from the closest time
point as the sex-difference prediction for the time point of interest
(see the Methods subsection “Validation of sex-difference predic-
tion”). Comparing the two, we found that Sunbear significantly
outperforms the baseline method (one-sided Wilcoxon paired
rank-sum tests P = 1.24 × 10
−5) (Fig. 3A). In the second validation,
we compared both the predicted and original sex difference pat-
terns against a small set of genes known to escape X Chromosome
inactivation (XCI) in most/all mouse tissues (known constitutive
escape genes; see the Methods subsection “Validation of sex-differ-
ence prediction ”) (Berletch et al. 2015). Escape genes are tran-
scribed from both copies of the X Chromosome in females (XX)
but only from the one X copy in males (XY); thus, they are expect-
ed to have higher expression in females than males. Sunbear is able
to rank the known escape genes to be more highly female-biased
than other genes on the X Chromosome (Fig. 3B). In contrast,
these genes are not ranked highly when we perform differential ex-
pression analysis directly on the original data (one-sided Wilcoxon
paired rank-sum tests P = 8.36 × 10
−11) (Fig. 3B). This trend is con-
sistent when comparing based on area under the precision-recall
curve ( Supplemental Fig. S9 ). These results suggest that Sunbear
is able to capture time-specific and sex-biased transcription
patterns.
We then systematically investigated the sex-biased pattern of
two major cell trajectories across all time points: macrophages
and central nervous system (CNS) neurons (see the Methods
subsection “Validation of sex-difference prediction”). Specifically,
we focused on the most abundant cell types within each trajectory:
glutamatergic neurons and border-associated macrophages. Mac-
rophages have been widely studied in the adult stage and exhibit
well-known sex-biased transcription and phenotypes (Gal-Oz
AB D C
EF
Figure 3. Sex differences in mouse embryonic development. ( A) Pairwise comparison of Sunbear prediction and the nearest neighbor baseline in reca-
pitulating differential expression patterns in sex-matched time points. Each dot indicates the AUROC score of recapitulating female-/male-biased patterns in
each sex-matched time point and cell type. ( B) Similar to in A, pairwise comparison of Sunbear prediction and the nearest neighbor baseline in ranking
escape genes to be more female-biased than all other genes on the X Chromosome. ( C,D) Predicted temporal sex-biased log fold change in glutamatergic
neurons and border-associated macrophages. Each line represents a gene that is predicted to be consistently higher in females than males and is colored by
whether the gene is a known constitutive escape gene or not. ( E) Distribution of predicted sex-biased scores of genes (0 = extremely male-biased, 1 = ex-
tremely female-biased), grouped and colored by whether the gene is upregulated (pink) or downregulated (blue) in Kdm6a KO versus WT samples in CD4+
cells. P-values are calculated by one-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum tests. ( F) Gene Ontology biological processes enriched in consistently female- and male-bi-
ased genes in border-associated macrophages. Nonredundant terms with the smallest FDR are selected for visualization. No enrichment of biological pro-
cesses is found in glutamatergic neurons.
Temporal profile inference in mouse development
Genome Research 2343
www.genome.org

===== PAGE 6 =====
et al. 2019). On the other hand, sex differences in CNS neurons
could be limited because the brain is the somatic tissue showing
the least sexual dimorphism in gene expression (Yang et al.
2006; Oliva et al. 2020; Rodríguez-Montes et al. 2023). To our
knowledge, no previous study has looked into sex differences in
the expression of these cell types in vivo during embryonic devel-
opment. Ranking Sunbear ’s prediction based on the median log
fold change between females and males across all time points,
the top female-biased gene is consistently Xist, which is a gene ex-
pressed exclusively from the inactive X Chromosome and is essen-
tial for the onset of XCI in females (Fig. 3C,D; Loda and Heard
2019). The second most female-biased gene is Gm26992, an anti-
sense to Xist with an unknown function. This is followed by other
constitutive escape genes, including Kdm6a, Jpx, Eif2s3x, Pbdc1,
Kdm5c, Ftx, and Ddx3x. In addition to the eight to nine constitu-
tive escape genes found in both cell types, macrophages show an
additional 14 X-linked genes (out of a total of 356 genes with a fe-
male bias), whereas neurons only show three X-linked genes (out
of a total of 226 genes with female bias) ( Supplemental Table
S1). This is consistent with the incomplete silencing of the X Chro-
mosome in macrophages (Syrett et al. 2019).
Beyond sex-linked genes, Sunbear also predicts autosomal
genes with consistent biases toward females or males in each cell
type across time, although the predicted sex differences associated
with these genes are associated with relatively small fold changes
in gene expression ( Supplemental Table S1 ; Fig. 3C,D). Examples
of autosomal genes with a female bias in macrophages include
Fcgr2b, Samd9l, and Ccr5, which have been implicated in autoim-
mune diseases (Verbeek et al. 2019; Robinson et al. 2022; Zhou
et al. 2023). Fewer autosomal genes have consistent female bias
in glutamatergic neurons, which show a few female-biased genes
in common with macrophages (e.g., Trim30a, Vmn2r29). These
genes show sex-biased transcription in embryos before sex hor-
mones are produced, suggesting that they are regulated by sex-
linked regulators within each cell.
We thus hypothesized that predicted female-biased autoso-
mal genes are functionally associated with female-biased X-linked
genes. To test this hypothesis, we focused on Kdm6a, which en-
codes a histone demethylase that removes the repressive histone
modification H3K27me3 to activate gene expression and is pre-
dicted by Sunbear to be the escape gene with the largest female-bi-
ased expression among expressed escape genes (except for Xist)i n
multiple cell types. Specifically, we hypothesized that autosomal
genes reported to be downregulated in aKdm6a conditional knock-
out (KO) experiment in CD4
+ cells (i.e., genes potentially activated
by KDM6A) (Itoh et al. 2019) would also show female-biased ex-
pression in border-associated macrophages compared with those
upregulated in Kdm6a KO (i.e., genes potentially repressed by
KDM6A). Indeed, Sunbear identifies the expected trend in bor-
der-associated macrophages (one-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test
P = 1.37 × 10
−2) (Fig. 3E). Meanwhile, we do not observe significant
difference in neurons (P = 8.74 × 10−2), possibly owing to low or no
expression of these genes in neurons or to different causes of sex
bias in the two cell types.
Furthermore, we quantified the odds ratio of protein –protein
interaction (PPI) between the consistently female-biased X-linked
genes and autosomal genes using the STRING database (see the
Methods subsection “Sex-biased gene and pathway analysis ”)
(Mering et al. 2003) and observed a significantly larger number
of PPIs between female-biased autosomal genes and X-linked
genes in macrophages compared with the number of PPIs between
random sets of autosomal genes and female-biased X-linked genes
(permutation test P = 9.90 × 10
−3; glutamatergic neurons are not
included in this analysis because there are very few PPIs between
sex-biased genes). These findings indicate that sex-biased tran-
scriptional changes are not limited to sex-linked genes and that au-
tosomal sex-biased gene transcription may be influenced by sex-
biased transcription of sex-linked genes.
Although predicted consistent female- and male-biased genes
in glutamatergic neurons are not enriched for specific biological
processes, female-biased genes predicted in border-associated mac-
rophages show significant enrichment in immune-related process-
es (hypergeometric test with FDR ≤ 0.05) (Supplemental Table S1 ;
for selected GO terms, see Fig. 3F). These findings agree with previ-
ous evidence suggesting that immune processes tend to be stron-
ger in females (Klein and Flanagan 2016).
Cross-modality temporal profile inference reveals dynamic
chromatin priming patterns
Sunbear can also be applied to infer multimodal temporal profile
changes. To do so, we trained Sunbear on scATAC-seq and
scRNA-seq time-series profiles collected from overlapping time
windows, including scRNA-seq (collected from E6.5 –E8.5 with 6
h intervals) (Pijuan-Sala et al. 2019) and scRNA-seq and scATAC-
seq coassays collected from four time points (i.e., E7.5, E8, E8.5,
E8.75) (Argelaguet et al. 2022). In total, there are four time points
for scATAC-seq and 10 time points for scRNA-seq. We did not in-
clude the Qiu et al. (2024) data set in this analysis because the au-
thors staged embryos by somite count rather than embryonic
developmental time between E8 and E10. Because scATAC-seq
measurements are, in general, sparser and more expensive to gen-
erate than scRNA-seq measurements, we configured Sunbear to use
scRNA-seq time-series data as a reference and trained with a similar
strategy to the single-modality temporal inference model. The
training of scATAC-seq model is guided by the scRNA-seq reference
by encouraging colocalization of cell embeddings between corre-
sponding cells in scRNA-seq and scATAC-seq, as well as by copying
the time-relevant neural network layer learned from scRNA-seq to
scATAC-seq. By doing so, Sunbear can jointly model time-relevant
changes across data modalities (Fig. 1).
We first asked whether Sunbear can recapitulate the temporal
patterns observed in the undercharacterized data domain (i.e.,
scATAC-seq) at a missing time point. To do that, we held out all
scATAC-seq profiles from each embryonic developmental, and we
trained Sunbear on the remaining cells. As a sanity check, we first
used UMAP to visualize the cell embeddings from different data
sets, modalities, and time points (Fig. 4A, with E8 held-out), verify-
ing that cells from different batches and data modalities are
colocalized. Then, using scRNA-seq or scATAC-seq profiles in
neighboring time points as queries (e.g., E7.5 or E8.5 for E8), we
applied Sunbear to predict each cell ’s chromatin accessibility in
the held-out time point. Validating our prediction on the differen-
tial accessibility pattern between the held-out and each neighbor-
ing query time point per cell type, we found that Sunbear can
accurately predict the temporal direction of chromatin accessibil-
ity changes (see the Methods subsection “Multimodal temporal
inference evaluation”) (Fig. 4B; Supplemental Fig. S10 ). Notably,
temporal accessibility can be recapitulated even when we use
scRNA-seq profiles as queries. These observations demonstrate
Sunbear’s ability to capture cross-modality temporal patterns in
missing time points.
Next, we assessed Sunbear ’s ability to recapitulate cell-to-cell
variations in the missing data modality (i.e., scATAC-seq) and time
Zhang et al.
2344 Genome Research
www.genome.org

===== PAGE 7 =====
point. To do that, we used scRNA-seq profiles from the held-
out time point as queries to predict each cell’s corresponding chro-
matin accessibility profiles. We then compared the predicted pro-
file against the original scATAC-seq measurements by comparing
the predicted and true scATAC-seq profiles per peak region across
all cells (Fig. 4C), and we found accurate prediction of accessibility
trends in >99.9% of peaks across all time points (see the Methods
subsection “Multimodal temporal inference evaluation ”).
Having validated Sunbear ’s performance on multimodal
temporal inference, we trained the model on all time points,
with the aim of characterizing patterns of temporal coordination
between transcription and chromatin accessibility changes within
each cell. Here, we focused on the hindbrain trajectory around
E8.25, when the cell lineage first emerges (Qiu et al. 2022).
Because there are no scATAC-seq profiles available at E8.25, we
used scRNA-seq profiles collected in E8.25 in the hindbrain trajec-
tory as queries to predict temporal cellular transcription and
accessibility profiles (Fig. 4D). We then used time-lagged cross-cor-
relation (TLCC) analysis (Chatfield 2013) to quantify the dynamic
coordination between the predicted gene transcription and its
nearby region ’s accessibility changes (Fig. 4D). Sorting genomic
regions based on their temporal association pattern with nearby
genes, we found diverse dynamic coordination between gene ex-
pression and chromatin priming (see the Methods subsection
“Identifying temporal dynamics between chromatin priming
and transcription”) (Fig. 4D,E). In particular, we observe a contin-
uous gradient of time lags between chromatin accessibilities and
their nearby gene expression changes. These patterns can be cat-
egorized as peak regions changing before or after gene expression
changes.
We further asked whether distinct sequence motifs are en-
riched in genomic regions where Sunbear predicts peak accessibil-
ities change before and after transcription changes. This analysis
showed that several transcription factor binding motifs are en-
riched in genome regions in the “before” category (e.g., CTCF,
ZIC2, and ZIC3) ( Supplemental Fig. S11 ) but showed none in
the “after” category (for details, see the Methods subsection
“Identifying temporal dynamics between chromatin priming
and transcription ”). Given that transcription initiation requires
the opening of chromatin regions at the enhancer and promoter
regions and the recruitment of transcription factors, our finding
agrees with a model in which chromosomal regions tend to be
primed with transcription factors before transcription changes
(Bernstein et al. 2006; Rada-Iglesias et al. 2011; Lara-Astiaso et al.
2014). Among the transcription factors that we predicted to prime
chromatin regions before transcriptional changes, ZIC2 and ZIC3
are important transcriptional regulators of hindbrain segmenta-
tion (Elms et al. 2003; Drummond et al. 2013). Meanwhile,
CTCF is a well-known mediator for chromatin loops and has
been suggested to indirectly affect the regulation of genes involved
in hindbrain development (Franke et al. 2021). Overall, the above
evidence suggests that Sunbear is able to identify temporal coordi-
nation between chromatin priming and transcription based on
static snapshots of cells measured in one modality and that
Sunbear can offer insights into transcription factors involved in
lineage priming during development.
A
CD E
B
Figure 4. Multimodal temporal inference. ( A) A UMAP embedding suggests that scRNA-seq and scATAC-seq profiles are well aligned across time and
batch. Only time points with both scRNA-seq and scATAC-seq available are shown. ( B) AUROC of the predicted differential accessibility pattern relative
to those derived from the original data sets. AUROC is calculated per cell type, and differential accessibility is calculated between each held-out t ime point
and each query time point (shown as “query time point → held-out time point”). (C ) Peak-wise AUROC of scATAC-seq profiles predicted based on scRNA-
seq relative to the original scATAC-seq profile in each held-out time point. AUROCs are calculated across all cells. ( D) Workflow for calculating the dynamic
association between peaks and genes. A query cell ’s scRNA-seq profile is fed into Sunbear to predict temporal patterns of gene expression and chromatin
accessibility. For each pair of chromatin region and its proximal gene, we calculate the correlation coefficient between them with incremental time shifts,
which results in a TLCC vector (column). ( E) Visualization of predicted peak region –gene relationships. Heatmap of TLCC matrices on randomly selected
5000 peak regions with accessibility changes ahead of ( “before”) or subsequent to ( “after”) nearby gene expression. Peak regions are sorted based on the
time shift with the maximum TLCC.
Temporal profile inference in mouse development
Genome Research 2345
www.genome.org

===== PAGE 8 =====
Discussion
A critical question for characterizing single cells is to understand
how each cell ’s profile changes across time in vivo. Although
most methods focus on inferring cell trajectories across time points
collected from a single modality or condition, questions remain
about how to model continuous profiles, compare profiles across
biological conditions with unmatched time points, and under-
stand the coordination between multiomic features. Sunbear pro-
vides a deep learning framework for temporal profile inference
across data modalities and conditions. The Sunbear model jointly
integrates data sets collected from different time points, batches,
conditions, and modalities, and the model outputs continuous
cellular profile changes across time. Sunbear thus allows us to
directly compare cellular profiles across conditions and investigate
joint temporal relationships between modalities. Furthermore,
Sunbear can be trained across millions of cells and the full space
of measured features (e.g., genes and peaks).
There are several advantages of Sunbear compared with com-
bining different models together for temporal prediction. First,
regarding the canonical example (i.e., using cross-modality predic-
tion first followed by the temporal analysis), a major technical
concern is the difference in data distribution between the observed
and predicted values. Because single-cell RNA-seq and ATAC-seq
are count-based and have a lot of missing values, single-cell analy-
sis methods (e.g., cross-modality prediction frameworks) have
been developed to take in these sparse and noisy measurements
and output a denoised and smoothed prediction. Thus, real obser-
vations and cross-modality predictions have major differences and
likely cannot be directly combined for downstream temporal infer-
ence methods. Second, Sunbear is able to incorporate single-cell
time-series from partially unmatched time points across condi-
tions or modalities, and it simultaneously optimizes for temporal
inference and cross-modality inference, in which a cell ’s profile
is estimated with the constraint that it should fall on a temporal
trajectory and agree with its observed profiles if measured in an-
other condition or data modality.
Compared with temporal methods on bulk measurements,
Sunbear can capture cell-to-cell variation (as demonstrated in
Fig. 4C), and this facilitates subsequent prediction of temporal co-
ordination of gene and peak at cellular resolution (Fig. 4D,E). In ad-
dition, one of the key advantages of Sunbear is that it does not
require knowledge of cell-type correspondence between time
points. This is particularly useful for scenarios without clear
knowledge of cell identity and cell-type correspondence (e.g., dur-
ing embryonic development). For bulk-level analysis, it is techni-
cally challenging to separate individual cell types during the
sample collection stage (e.g., during embryonic development); if
this approach is applied to single-cell data sets, then the pseudo-
bulk profiles rely heavily on prior cell-type annotation and knowl-
edge of cell-type matching between time points.
Studies of sex differences during embryonic development
are few and often lack matched biological samples across time
points. In addition, differential expression analysis at the cell-
type level may suffer from biases owing to differences in sub-
cell-type composition between conditions. Our method mitigates
this bias by computationally inferring cellular profiles at missing
time points and conditions and by performing cross-condition
comparisons at single-cell resolution. Our predictions, for the
first time, systematically characterized sex-biased expression pat-
terns during mouse embryonic development. Besides recapitulat-
ing well-known sex-biased genes, we generated various data-
driven hypotheses for downstream experimental validation in
the future.
Sunbear also identifies dynamic associations between chro-
matin priming and transcription. Previous studies on multimodal
measurements have found or assumed that chromatin priming
tends to occur ahead of transcription changes (Ma et al. 2020;
Wu et al. 2025). In our analysis, we instead focused on the scenario
in which only one type of data modality is measured, and we com-
putationally predicted the multimodal dynamic coordination in
each cell. Our results not only agree with previous knowledge
but also suggest diverse types of dynamic coordination (e.g., differ-
ent time delays, as well as positive and negative correlations). With
the increasing amount of effort being devoted to characterizing
mouse embryonic development, we envision that our temporal
predictions can be combined with genome annotations from cor-
responding cell types and time points in the future.
In the future, Sunbear could be improved in several ways.
First, although our model does not fully rely on the assumption
of consistent cell proliferation or death rate, incorporating an
explicit model of cell death and cell proliferation could further
improve the temporal alignment, as was done previously
(Schiebinger et al. 2019; Yeo et al. 2021). Second, as a proof-of-con-
cept analysis, our current multimodal model leverages some coas-
say data to guide the alignment of cells across modalities.
Generalizing the framework to carry out cross-modality alignment
without requiring coassay data would greatly enhance the applica-
bility of Sunbear. In addition, compared with neuralODE-based
methods, although Sunbear has the advantage of being able to
train on larger numbers of cells and more accurately estimating cel-
lular profiles, it requires multiple time points to guide the infer-
ence of temporal trends and assumes that changes between time
points are relatively smooth. We anticipate that adding constraints
learned from trajectory inference models and pseudotime infor-
mation to Sunbear ’s time encoding framework will further im-
prove its generalizability and performance.
In the future, we envision the Sunbear framework being ap-
plied to integrate and compare human disease conditions collect-
ed at varying time points, characterize sequential transcription
factor activation, and reveal the dynamic multiomic coordination
during cell fate specification.
Methods
Mouse embryonic development data
The single-cell RNA-seq data sets used in this paper are listed in
Table 2. For each data set, we obtained the raw count-by-cell matri-
ces. For the coassay data set from Argelaguet et al., only time points
with at least two biological replicates in this data set were retained.
For efficiency of model training on the Qiu et al. data set (Qiu et al.
2024), we randomly subsampled cells to retain 1 million cells.
Because P0 samples exhibit a huge environmental shift relative
to embryonic stages, the P0 samples are not included in this anal-
ysis. In addition, because embryos before E10 are staged by somite
counts, we converted the somite number to developmental time
points by assuming equal time intervals between somite stages
(i.e., each somite stage has incremental time of 2(day)/34(somite)).
Modeling scRNA-seq temporal profiles
The goal of Sunbear is to decompose observed cellular profiles into
latent factors representing cell identity, batch or condition, and
the time point when each cell is collected. In this way, we can
Zhang et al.
2346 Genome Research
www.genome.org

===== PAGE 9 =====
predict a cell’s profile across time and conditions by concatenating
its cell identity factor with varying time and condition factors.
Thus, Sunbear takes as input single-cell time-series profiles and re-
constructs them by cell identity, time, and batch/condition fac-
tors. Specifically, to interpolate continuous shifts of single-cell
profiles across time points that are not captured, Sunbear repre-
sents time with sinusoidal encodings; that is, the embedding for
each time point t is a d-dimensional vector, represented as
sin(w
1 · t), cos(w1 · t), ... , sin(wd/2 · t), cos(wd/2 · t))[] T
,
where k ∈ 0, 1, …, d − 1 and wk =2 π/100002k/d, and t is represented
in the units of day.
The default dimensions for cell identity embedding and time
encoding is 50. The dimension of the time-aware embeddings is
the same as the cell identity embeddings. The dimension of hid-
den layers is determined as the geometric mean of the input di-
mension and the latent dimension.
Sunbear is optimized toward two goals: obtaining accurate re-
construction of the observed single-cell profiles and aligning cells
collected across different time points by learning time-invariant
cell identity embeddings. To achieve these two goals, Sunbear
adapts the cVAE framework (Lopez et al. 2018), with conditions
as sinusoidal-encoded time factor and one-hot encoded sample
conditions (e.g., sex, batch). Sunbear assumes that scRNA-seq
counts follow a zero-inflated negative binomial (ZINB) distribu-
tion and estimates the reconstruction loss as the log-likelihood
of the ZINB distribution (Lopez et al. 2018). Given scRNA-seq
from time points one to T, Sunbear minimizes the following loss
function:
loss
RNA =− zinb.loglik(RNAtrue, RNApred)
+ DKL[Q(z|X, t)||P(z, t)], (1)
where z represents the distribution of the learned cell identity em-
bedding based on the input gene expression profile (i.e., RNA).
To further encourage cell embeddings to be independent of
time, we also add a discriminator that tries to predict time points
based on cell embeddings, and we perform an alternative training
by iteratively minimizing the discriminator loss,
loss
DIS = CE(discriminator(z), t), (2)
and the generator loss,
lossGEN = lossRNA − lossDIS. (3)
During model training, we held out all cells from one time
point as the test set. Validation and training sets were created by
randomly splitting the cells in the remaining time points with a
1:4 ratio. When there were large numbers of cells or time points,
to make sure the model does not overfit to a high abundance
time point, we capped the number of cells in the validation set
at each time point to be 2000. Once Sunbear is trained with the ex-
isting time points, we can estimate single-cell profiles for any miss-
ing time point by swapping the time vector to the corresponding
time point. We can also swap the condition factor to predict a cell’s
profile if it were captured in another data condition (e.g., an oppo-
site sex).
Extension of Sunbear for multimodal temporal interference
Next, we extended Sunbear to jointly infer temporal profiles across
data modalities based on single-modal and multimodal time-series
profiles. Similar to the single-modality case, for each data modali-
ty, Sunbear learns cell embeddings that represent cell identities,
which are conditionally independent of the time embeddings,
conditions, and batch effects. For the scATAC-seq domain, we
binarize the scATAC-seq profiles and assume that they follow a
Bernoulli distribution, estimating the reconstruction loss using bi-
nary cross entropy (Ashuach et al. 2022). Thus, the scATAC-seq
model is optimized with
loss
ATAC =− BCE(ATACtrue, ATACpred)
+ DKL[Q(z|X, t)||P(z, t)]. (4)
Because of the imbalanced time-series measurements across
data modalities (e.g., scRNA-seq time-series usually cover more
time points than scATAC-seq), we designed Sunbear to take one
data modality with denser time points as a reference to guide the
imputation of the data modality with sparser time points. To
this end, we optimized Sunbear by using scRNA-seq as a reference
and forced the scATAC-seq model to have a shared, time-relevant
network layer and cell embeddings with the scRNA-seq model.
By doing so, we enable the sharing of interaction effects among
cells, time, and conditions across data modalities.
Sunbear does stepwise optimization during training. In the
first step, we train the scRNA-seq time model with Equation 1,
while fixing all weights in the scATAC-seq model. In the second
step, we train the scATAC-seq time model with regard to the
scRNA-seq reference (Equation 5), with weights in the time factors
fixed to be the same as the scRNA-seq and with the scATAC-seq cell
embeddings forced to fall close to the scRNA-seq cell embeddings.
We leverage the one-to-one cell correspondence in coassay data
sets to supervise the alignment of cell embeddings between data
modalities. This is achieved with a mean-squared error (MSE)
loss between corresponding cell embeddings, together with a
translation loss between scRNA-seq and scATAC-seq coassay
profiles:
loss
multi = lossATAC + l∗MSE(ATACembedding, RNAembedding)
+ lossTRANS(ATAC|RNA) + lossTRANS(ATAC|RNA). (5)
During training, Sunbear iteratively optimizes the scRNA-seq
model and the scATAC-seq model, so that the scATAC-seq model
can slowly adapt to the cell embeddings and shared interaction ef-
fects of the reference scRNA-seq model.
Table 2. Time-series data in mouse embryonic development
Assay Strain Sex Start End Freq Source
sci-RNA-seq BL6 m&f E8 E18.75 2 –6 h https:/ /omg.gs.washington.edu/ (Qiu et al. 2024)
sci-RNA-seq BL6 – E6.5 E8.5 6 h https:/ /tome.gs.washington.edu/ (Pijuan-Sala et al. 2019)
sci-RNA-seq BL6 m&f E8.5 E9.5 somite https:/ /tome.gs.washington.edu/ (Qiu et al. 2022)
sci-RNA-seq BL6 m&f E9.5 E13.5 24 h https:/ /tome.gs.washington.edu/ (Cao et al. 2019)
Coassay: scRNA-seq & scATAC-seq BL6 – E7.5 8.75 ∼6 h https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/ (GSE205117)
(Argelaguet et al. 2022)
Temporal profile inference in mouse development
Genome Research 2347
www.genome.org

===== PAGE 10 =====
To validate the model, we held out all single cells from one
time point as the test set, and we randomly split cells from the re-
maining time points into a validation set (1/5) and a training set
(4/5). The number of cells in the validation set at each time point
is capped to be 2000.
Hyperparameter tuning
As with any deep learning model, Sunbear has a variety of hyper-
parameters that need to be tuned. Accordingly, we performed a
grid search on the following hyperparameters:
 number of latent dimensions in the VAE ∈ {25, 50, 100},
 minimum wavelength of sinusoidal encoding ∈ {1}day, and
 MSE weight λ (when trained on multimodality data) ∈ {1, 100,
10000}.
The number of hidden layers was fixed at two, and the dimen-
sion of the time embeddings was fixed at 50. In mouse embryonic
development studies, the minimum wavelength of the sinusoidal
encoding is defined as 1 day, because certain cellular profiles may
follow a circadian pattern. In general, this parameter should be
tuned to scale according to the actual time point values or expect-
ed biological variations. For single-modality data, we trained one
model for each of the three points in our hyperparameter grid.
For multimodal model, we trained one model for each of the 3 ×
3 = 9 points in our hyperparameter grid. We then selected the
best-performing model based on the validation set. Ideally, the
model should be able to reconstruct the observed profiles accurate-
ly using the neighboring time points, without relying on cell-type
labels. Thus, we calculate the cross-time prediction ’s pseudobulk
Pearson’s correlation with the original profile, as well as the LISI
score (Korsunsky et al. 2019) between neighboring time points,
as a way to assess the ability of each model to generalize across
time. In the single-modality model, we select hyperparameters
based on the summed rank of cross-time pseudobulk Pearson’s cor-
relation, LISI score across all neighboring time points, as well as the
LISI score between neighbors of the held-out time point. The
summed ranks across metrics are further rescaled so that the best
model has a rank of one. When multiple batches are available,
we also include the LISI score between batches in the model selec-
tion criteria (Supplemental Fig. S12A). In the multimodality mod-
el, we select the best hyperparameters using the above criteria
based on the nonreference (i.e., scATAC-seq) data modality, to-
gether with the cross-modality LISI score and cross-modality trans-
lation losses in both directions ( Supplemental Fig. S12B ).
scRNA-seq temporal inference evaluation
We evaluate the model ’s ability to generalize to uncharacterized
sex and time points through leave-one-out cross-validation; that
is, for each time point and each sex, we hold out the entire cell pop-
ulation from training and predict its profile from neighboring time
points (“cross-time”) or the opposite sex ( “cross-sex”). Because of
the disruptive nature of single-cell measurements, there is no
ground truth for a single cell ’s profile at another time point.
Therefore, for the purpose of validation, we instead leverage cell-
type labels, as previously annotated by biological experts, and
ask whether the pseudobulk gene expression of each cell type
can be correctly recapitulated, compared with pseudobulk profiles
from corresponding cell types in neighboring time points.
To evaluate at the cell-type level, for each cell type in the held-
out time point, we predict its profile using the neighboring time
point’s profile in the same cell trajectory and compare the predic-
tion accuracy using pseudobulk Pearson’s correlation between the
held-out observed value and the predicted value. Specifically,
because our prediction corrects for the sequencing depth of single
cells, to make a fair comparison, we calculate the pseudobulk pro-
file by normalizing every single cell’s sequencing depth first before
averaging them across cells. Only cell types with at least 25 cells in
the held-out time point are considered in this evaluation.
For each held-out sex and time point, we make predictions
with four combinations of starting points: previous or subsequent
time points in the corresponding ( “cross-time”) or opposite sex
(“cross-sex”). The performance in each of these settings is com-
pared against a corresponding baseline, which is the pseudobulk
Pearson’s correlation of the held-out cell type with the cell-type-
specific profiles in the corresponding previous or subsequent
time points in the corresponding sex. We also compared Sunbear
to a stricter baseline: the pseudobulk profiles of the corresponding
cell trajectory in the previous and subsequent cell types. This is a
difficult baseline to beat because the cell trajectory is annotated
with regard to the evidence that the previous, held-out, and subse-
quent cells in the same cell type should follow a sequential trajec-
tory. However, Sunbear has not seen cells in the held-out time
point or any cell-type labels and is forced to make predictions
only based on the previous or subsequent time point. Given that
embryos collected before E10 are staged by somite number, for
which clock time cannot be precisely determined, we only perform
such evaluation for samples collected after E10. One-sided
Wilcoxon paired rank-sum tests are conducted to compare the pre-
diction performance with baselines.
Predicting transcriptional sex differences across time
For each gene, Sunbear returns a sex-biased score based on sex-
matched predicted profiles across cells within each cell type. To
do that, first, we predict each cell ’s denoised profile in both sexes.
Then, for each cell type, we calculate each gene ’s sex-biased pat-
tern over time by performing, for each time point, a one-sided
Wilcoxon signed-rank test between predicted gene expression in
females and males across all cells. Along with each statistical test,
a sex-biased score is calculated as the sum of positive ranks divided
by the sum of all absolute ranks n(n + 1)/2. We rescale the score to
the range [0, 1], with values close to 0.5 indicating minimal sex dif-
ference and scores of one and zero representing strongly female- or
male-biased expression. To make sure the sex-biased is robust to
outliers, we only calculated such a score when there are more
than 50 cells within a cell type.
Validation of sex-difference prediction
To validate Sunbear ’s sex-difference prediction, we first retrieved
sex-biased transcriptional patterns from three time points (E13,
E13.25, and E13.75) with matched female and male samples by
Qiu et al. (2024). Specifically, 18 cell types with enough observa-
tions across these three time points (i.e., 1000 or more cells) are se-
lected for downstream evaluation. Because there are no biological
replicates available at each time point, following the suggestion of
Squair et al. (2021), for each cell type, we calculated the original
differential expression pattern between sexes by applying a
Student’s t-test on sequencing depth –corrected and log-normal-
ized single-cell profiles. Genes expressed in <5% of cells are exclud-
ed from the differential expression calculation. Genes with
Benjamini–Hochberg-corrected FDR ≤ 0.05 are labeled as signifi-
cantly up- or downregulated genes.
We then validated Sunbear’s sex-difference prediction against
the original differential expression pattern within each time point
and cell type. To mimic the scenario in which only one sex is pro-
filed at a time point, we held out the male sample in the time point
of interest from model training and then calculated sex-biased
Zhang et al.
2348 Genome Research
www.genome.org

===== PAGE 11 =====
scores based on the predicted profiles. We tested female- and male-
biased expression prediction separately. In each direction, genes
that are significantly female-/male-biased (FDR ≤ 0.05) are as-
signed positive labels, and all other genes are labeled as negatives.
AUROC is calculated for our prediction against differential expres-
sion labels. In the end, for each cell type and time point, two
AUROC scores are calculated.
As a baseline, we calculated the AUROC of the original differ-
ential expression patterns in the closest sex-matched time point
against the female-/male-biased gene labels in the time point of
study. A one-sided Wilcoxon paired rank-sum test was conducted
to compare the prediction performance between Sunbear and the
baseline across all matched time points, cell types, and differential
expression directions.
Besides comparing Sunbear ’s prediction with the original
measurements, we also validated the predictions against prior
knowledge of sex-biased transcription. To do so, we retrieved X-es-
cape genes (including Ddx3x, Kdm6a, Kdm5c, Eif2s3x, Pbdc1, Jpx,
Ftx, and 5530601H04Rik) from Berletch et al. (2015) and calculated
the AUROC of predicting these genes to be more female-biased
than all other genes on the X Chromosome. For this analysis, we
used the differential expression pattern between sexes in original
measurements as a baseline. For each cell type and time point,
AUROCs based on our prediction are compared against those
based on baselines using a one-sided Wilcoxon paired rank-sum
test.
Sex-biased gene and pathway analysis
To systematically characterize sex differences across time and
avoid biases introduced by individual samples, we used two addi-
tional strategies to ensure robustness. First, we trained 10 models
with a random time point held out from training each time, and
we took the median of sex-biased statistics across these models
as the predicted sex-biased score. Second, instead of comparing
sex differences based on one biological sample at each time point,
we calculated sex differences across cells from the current, previ-
ous and subsequent time points. These approaches allow us to
derive robust sex-biased calculations across multiple biological
samples.
To identify sex-biased genes for each cell type, we focused on
time points with more than 25 cells in that cell type. To focus on
genes that are important in that cell type, for each time point in
that cell type, we ranked genes by predicted mean expression level
across sexes and retrieved the first half of highly expressed genes.
Only genes that are consistently expressed across all time points
in the corresponding cell type are included in downstream analy-
sis. Sex-biased genes are determined as genes with sex-biased scores
consistently falling above or below 0.5 across all time points. GO
term enrichment analysis was performed using a hypergeometric
test, and only those terms with Benjamini –Hochberg-corrected
FDR ≤ 0.05 are reported.
PPI information from Mus musculus was downloaded from
the STRING database (Mering et al. 2003). Because we are interest-
ed in the broad definition of interactions (i.e., including coexpres-
sion, shared pathways, etc.), we did not apply additional filtering
to the score and type of interaction in the STRING database. The
odds ratio was calculated as the ratio of the odds of interactions
happening between female-biased autosomal and X-linked genes,
compared with odds of female-biased X-linked genes interacting
with non-female-biased autosomal genes. Statistical tests are
only carried out when there are 50 or more PPIs. We then generat-
ed the null distribution by calculating the odds ratio of interac-
tions between randomly sampled autosomal genes and female-
biased X-linked genes. Random sampling is repeated 100 times,
and the size of the random sample is equal to the number of fe-
male-biased autosomal genes.
Multimodal temporal inference evaluation
We first tested whether Sunbear can recapitulate temporal changes
in scATAC-seq at a missing time point. Because we do not have
ground-truth data at the single-cell level, we instead asked whether
Sunbear can correctly predict the direction of chromatin accessibil-
ity changes across time in each cell type. To do that, we held out all
scATAC-seq profiles from one time point and used scRNA-seq or
scATAC-seq profiles at a neighboring time point as queries to pre-
dict the missing time point ’s scATAC-seq profiles. For each cell
type and each peak, we predicted peak accessibility changes be-
tween the missing time point and the query time point using
the test statistic of the one-sided Wilcoxon paired rank-sum test
(i.e., the sum of positive ranks divided by the sum of all absolute
ranks). To make sure the prediction is robust to random initiation
and data split during model training, we trained 10 models with
different random seeds and took the median of differential peak
accessibility statistics as the final prediction. We then compared
our prediction against differentially accessible peaks between cells
measured in the held-out and the query time point within the cor-
responding cell type. Only cell types with 25 or more cells in both
time points were retained. Differential accessibility of the original
profiles was calculated using edgeR on the pseudobulk level (Fang
et al. 2021). Finally, we report the AUROC of our prediction against
significantly up- and downregulated peaks (labeled as positives
and negatives, FDR ≤ 0.05).
To validate Sunbear ’s performance at capturing individual-
cell-level differences in the missing data modality, we used
scRNA-seq profiles in the held-out time point as queries, and we
asked how well their corresponding chromatin accessibility pro-
files can be recapitulated. For each genomic region that is accessi-
ble in >5% of cells in the held-out population, we calculate the
AUROC of the predicted accessibility against the original binary ac-
cessibility pattern across all cells. Similarly, for each genomic re-
gion, we also calculate the P-value of its predicted accessibility to
be higher in cells with peaks in the original measurement than
those without, using a one-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test. The
fractions of peaks with Benjamini –Hochberg-corrected FDR ≤
0.05 are reported.
Because AUPR emphasizes the correctness at the top of the
ranked list, we also calculated AUPR on recapitulating differen-
tially expressed peaks from the temporal prediction. To correct
for the skew in AUPR measurement toward peaks with large posi-
tive proportions (PP, PP = #(cells with peak expressed)/#cells)).
We then normalized AUPRC with AUPRnorm = (AUPR-PP)/(1 −
PP), where zero represents the behavior or a random predictor,
and one indicates a perfect predictor. In this work, we use
AUROC and AUPRnorm as performance measurements.
Identifying temporal dynamics between chromatin priming
and transcription
To investigate the dynamic relationship between gene expression
and chromatin accessibility, we varied the time factor for a query
cell to predict continuous changes in transcription and chromatin
accessibility. We chose to focus on the hindbrain trajectory
because it first emerges at E8.25, when scATAC-seq profiles are
not available. In addition, the hindbrain trajectory is conserved
across vertebrates, thus enabling us to validate our results on find-
ings derived from model organisms (e.g., zebrafish) (Gilland and
Baker 1993). We also focused on genes with significantly increased
or decreased expression levels in the hindbrain at E8.25 relative to
Temporal profile inference in mouse development
Genome Research 2349
www.genome.org

===== PAGE 12 =====
its parent trajectory at E8. We reasoned that temporal regulation of
these genes is likely critical for hindbrain formation (Qiu et al.
2022). For each gene, we retrieved its proximal peaks that are
mapped to 200 kb flanking regions upstream of its transcription
start site. Then we predicted the gene expression and proximal
chromosome accessibility changes within a [7.5, 9]-day interval,
and we calculated the TLCC of the gene with respect to each of
its proximal peak regions.
The TLCC score is calculated via the following steps. For each
peak region and gene pair, we shift the predicted accessibility pro-
files along the time axis at 0.01-day steps, considering shifts in the
range [ −0.5, 0.5]. Then, for each step, we calculate the Pearson ’s
correlation between the predicted expression profile and the shift-
ed temporal accessibility profile within the core [8, 8.5]-day inter-
val. Thus, each peak region and gene pair in a cell can be
represented as a 101-dimensional vector consisting of Pearson ’s
correlations corresponding to the varying time shifts. Concatenat-
ing all pairs of genes and peak regions, we obtain a TLCC matrix
with 101 by #region –gene pair dimensions.
To maintain single-cell resolution while avoiding potential
noise generated from a single cell or a single model, we trained
a set of models with 10 random seeds and took the median of
the predicted gene expression values or peak accessibility values.
For a query cell, we selected its four closest neighbor cells summa-
rized across the 10 models. Specifically, for each model, we retain
its top 25 nearest neighbors based on Euclidean distance on
Sunbear’s cell embeddings and then sum the ranks across 10 mod-
els to obtain the final ranking. Cells that are not among the top 25
neighbors in any of the runs are excluded from the nearest neigh-
bor list. On top of the five cells, we used Sunbear to predict each
cell’s multimodal temporal TLCC matrices and concatenated the
TLCC vectors across the five cells along the peak gene axis.
Because not all proximal chromatin regions regulate transcrip-
tion, we removed region –gene pairs with a maximum correlation
of less than 0.5 and only retained peak region and gene pairs
showing up in more than one cell after the filtering step.
Finally, we categorize peak regions into two categories: those
whose accessibility pattern consistently changes ahead of its near-
by gene expression pattern ( “before”) or subsequent to the gene
expression pattern ( “after”).
To identify sequence features specific for each category, we
first retrieved all unique sequences from peak regions within
each category and then used MEME-ChIP to generate enriched
motifs for one set of genomics regions against the other (with
“differential enrichment mode ” mode) with default cutoffs
(Machanick and Bailey 2011). Tomtom was used to identify tran-
scription factors with Q-value ≤ 0.05 (Gupta et al. 2007).
Software availability
The Apache-licensed Sunbear source code is available at GitHub
(https:/ /github.com/Noble-Lab/Sunbear) and as Supplemental
Code.
Competing interest statement
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgments
This work was funded in part by National Institutes of Health
awards UM1 HG011531 (National Human Genome Research
Institute), R35 GM131745 (National Institute of General Medical
Sciences), and K99 GR052357 (National Human Genome
Research Institute). We thank Bo Wen for assistance with Docker
containerization of the codebase.
Author contributions : Conceptualization was by R.Z. and
W.S.N. Data curation was by R.Z. Formal analysis was by
R.Z. Funding acquisition was by W.S.N., C.M.D., and R.Z.
Investigation was by R.Z., C.Q., G.N.F., and G.L. Methodology
was by R.Z., J.V., and W.S.N. Software was by R.Z. Supervision
was by J.S., J.V., X.D., W.S.N., and C.M.D. Validation was by
R.Z., C.Q., G.N.F., G.L., X.D., and C.M.D. Visualization was by
R.Z. Writing of the original draft was by R.Z. Reviewing and editing
were by all authors.
References
Argelaguet R, Lohoff T, Li JG, Nakhuda A, Drage D, Krueger F, Velten L, Clark
SJ, Reik W. 2022. Decoding gene regulation in the mouse embryo using
single-cell multi-omics. bioRxiv doi:10.1101/2022.06.15.496239
Ashuach T, Reidenbach DA, Gayoso A, Yosef N. 2022. PeakVI: a deep gener-
ative model for single-cell chromatin accessibility analysis. Cell Rep
Methods 2: 100182. doi:10.1016/j.crmeth.2022.100182
Berletch JB, Ma W, Yang F, Shendure J, Noble WS, Disteche CM, Deng X.
2015. Escape from X inactivation varies in mouse tissues. PLoS Genet
11: e1005079. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1005079
Bernstein BE, Mikkelsen TS, Xie X, Kamal M, Huebert DJ, Cuff J, Fry B,
Meissner A, Wernig M, Plath K, et al. 2006. A bivalent chromatin struc-
ture marks key developmental genes in embryonic stem cells. Cell 125:
315–326. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2006.02.041
Borsari B, Frank M, Wattenberg ES, Xu K, Liu SX, Yu X, Gerstein M. 2025.
The chronODE framework for modelling multi-omic time series with or-
dinary differential equations and machine learning. Nat Commun 16:
7021. doi:10.1038/s41467-025-61921-9
Cao J, Spielmann M, Qiu X, Huang X, Ibrahim DM, Hill AJ, Zhang F,
Mundlos S, Christiansen L, Steemers FJ, et al. 2019. The single-cell tran-
scriptional landscape of mammalian organogenesis. Nature 566: 496–
502. doi:10.1038/s41586-019-0969-x
Chatfield C. 2013. The analysis of time series: theory and practice . Springer,
New York.
Drummond DL, Cheng CS, Selland LG, Hocking JC, Prichard LB,
Waskiewicz AJ. 2013. The role of Zic transcription factors in regulating
hindbrain retinoic acid signaling. BMC Dev Biol 13: 31. doi:10.1186/
1471-213X-13-31
Elms P, Siggers P, Napper D, Greenfield A, Arkell R. 2003. Zic2 is required for
neural crest formation and hindbrain patterning during mouse develop-
ment. Dev Biol 264: 391–406. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2003.09.005
Erbe R, Stein-O ’Brien G, Fertig EJ. 2023. Transcriptomic forecasting with
neural ordinary differential equations. Patterns 4: 100793. doi:10
.1016/j.patter.2023.100793
Fang R, Preissl S, Li Y, Hou X, Lucero J, Wang X, Motamedi A, Shiau AK,
Zhou X, Xie F, et al. 2021. Comprehensive analysis of single cell
ATAC-seq data with SnapATAC. Nat Commun 12: 1337. doi:10.1038/
s41467-021-21583-9
Franke M, De la Calle-Mustienes E, Neto A, Almuedo-Castillo M, Irastorza-
Azcarate I, Acemel RD, Tena JJ, Santos-Pereira JM, Gómez-Skarmeta JL.
2021. CTCF knockout in zebrafish induces alterations in regulatory
landscapes and developmental gene expression. Nat Commun 12:
5415. doi:10.1038/s41467-021-25604-5
Gal-Oz ST, Maier B, Yoshida H, Seddu K, Elbaz N, Czysz C, Zuk O, Stranger
BE, Ner-Gaon H, Shay T. 2019. Immgen report: sexual dimorphism in
the immune system transcriptome. Nat Commun 10: 4295. doi:10
.1038/s41467-019-12348-6
Gilland E, Baker R. 1993. Conservation of neuroepithelial and mesodermal
segments in the embryonic vertebrate head. Cells Tissues Organs 148:
110–123. doi:10.1159/000147530
Gupta S, Stamatoyannopoulos JA, Bailey TL, Noble WS. 2007. Quantifying
similarity between motifs. Genome Biol 8: R24. doi:10.1186/gb-2007-8-
2-r24
Huguet G, Magruder DS, Tong A, Fasina O, Kuchroo M, Wolf G,
Krishnaswamy S. 2022. Manifold interpolating optimal-transport flows
for trajectory inference. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 35: 29705–29718.
Itoh Y, Golden LC, Itoh N, Matsukawa MA, Ren E, Tse V, Arnold AP, Voskuhl
RR, et al. 2019. The X-linked histone demethylase Kdm6a in CD4
+ T
lymphocytes modulates autoimmunity. J Clin Invest 129: 3852–3863.
doi:10.1172/JCI126250
Jiang Q, Zhang S, Wan L. 2022. Dynamic inference of cell developmental
complex energy landscape from time series single-cell transcriptomic
data. PLoS Comput Biol 18: e1009821. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi
.1009821
Zhang et al.
2350 Genome Research
www.genome.org

===== PAGE 13 =====
Klein SL, Flanagan KL. 2016. Sex differences in immune responses. Nat Rev
Immunol 16: 626–638. doi:10.1038/nri.2016.90
Klein D, Palla G, Lange M, Klein M, Piran Z, Gander M, Meng-Papaxanthos
L, Sterr M, Saber L, Jing C, et al. 2025. Mapping cells through time and
space with moscot. Nature 638: 1065–1075. doi:10.1038/s41586-024-
08453-2
Korsunsky I, Millard N, Fan J, Slowikowski K, Zhang F, Wei K, Baglaenko Y,
Brenner M, Loh P, Raychaudhuri S. 2019. Fast, sensitive and accurate in-
tegration of single-cell data with Harmony. Nat Methods 16: 1289–1296.
doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0619-0
Lange M, Bergen V, Klein M, Setty M, Reuter B, Bakhti M, Lickert H, Ansari
M, Schniering J, Schiller HB, et al. 2022. CellRank for directed single-cell
fate mapping. Nat Methods 19: 159–170. doi:10.1038/s41592-021-
01346-6
Lara-Astiaso D, Weiner A, Lorenzo-Vivas E, Zaretsky I, Jaitin DA, David E,
Keren-Shaul H, Mildner A, Winter D, Jung S, et al. 2014. Chromatin state
dynamics during blood formation. Science 345: 943–949. doi:10.1126/
science.1256271
Li C, Virgilio MC, Collins KL, Welch JD. 2023. Multi-omic single-cell veloc-
ity models epigenome –transcriptome interactions and improves cell
fate prediction. Nat Biotechnol 41: 387–398. doi:10.1038/s41587-022-
01476-y
Loda A, Heard E. 2019. Xist RNA in action: past, present, and future. PLoS
Genet 15: e1008333. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1008333
Lopez R, Regier J, Cole MB, Jordan MI, Yosef N. 2018. Deep generative mod-
eling for single-cell transcriptomics. Nat Methods 15: 1053–1058. doi:10
.1038/s41592-018-0229-2
Lotfollahi M, Susmelj AK, Donno CD, Hetzel L, Ji Y, Ibarra IL, Srivatsan SR,
Naghipourfar M, Daza RM, Martin B, et al. 2023. Predicting cellular re-
sponses to complex perturbations in high-throughput screens. Mol
Syst Biol 19: e11517. doi:10.15252/msb.202211517
Ma S, Zhang B, LaFave LM, Earl AS, Chiang Z, Hu Y, Ding J, Brack A, Kartha
VK, Tay T, et al. 2020. Chromatin potential identified by shared single-
cell profiling of RNA and chromatin. Cell 183: 1103–1116.e20. doi:10
.1016/j.cell.2020.09.056
Machanick P, Bailey TL. 2011. MEME-ChIP: motif analysis of large DNA
datasets. Bioinformatics 27: 1696–1697. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/
btr189
Mering CV, Huynen M, Jaeggi D, Schmidt S, Bork P, Snel B. 2003. STRING: a
database of predicted functional associations between proteins. Nucleic
Acids Res 31: 258–261. doi:10.1093/nar/gkg034
Oliva M, Muñoz-Aguirre M, Kim-Hellmuth S, Wucher V, Gewirtz AD, Cotter
DJ, Parsana P, Kasela S, Balliu B, Viñuela A, et al. 2020. The impact of sex
on gene expression across human tissues. Science 369: eaba3066. doi:10
.1126/science.aba3066
Pijuan-Sala B, Griffiths JA, Guibentif C, Hiscock TW, Jawaid W, Calero-Nieto
FJ, Mulas C, Ibarra-Soria X, Tyser RC, Ho DL, et al. 2019. A single-cell
molecular map of mouse gastrulation and early organogenesis. Nature
566: 490–495. doi:10.1038/s41586-019-0933-9
Qiu C, Cao J, Martin BK, Li T, Welsh IC, Srivatsan S, Huang X, Calderon D,
Noble WS, Disteche CM, et al. 2022. Systematic reconstruction of cellu-
lar trajectories across mouse embryogenesis. Nat Genet 54: 328–341.
doi:10.1038/s41588-022-01018-x
Qiu C, Martin BK, Welsh IC, Daza RM, Le T-M, Huang X, Nichols EK, Taylor
ML, Fulton O, O ’Day DR, et al. 2024. A single-cell time-lapse of mouse
prenatal development from gastrula to birth. Nature 626: 1084–1093.
doi:10.1038/s41586-024-07069-w
Rada-Iglesias A, Bajpai R, Swigut T, Brugmann SA, Flynn RA, Wysocka J.
2011. A unique chromatin signature uncovers early developmental en-
hancers in humans. Nature 470: 279–283. doi:10.1038/nature09692
Robinson GA, Peng J, Peckham H, Butler G, Pineda-Torra I, Ciurtin C, Jury
EC. 2022. Investigating sex differences in T regulatory cells from cisgen-
der and transgender healthy individuals and patients with autoimmune
inflammatory disease: a cross-sectional study. Lancet Rheumatol 4: e710–
e724. doi:10.1016/S2665-9913(22)00198-9
Rodríguez-Montes L, Ovchinnikova S, Yuan X, Studer T, Sarropoulos I,
Anders S, Kaessmann H, Cardoso-Moreira M. 2023. Sex-biased gene ex-
pression across mammalian organ development and evolution. Science
382: eadf1046. doi:10.1126/science.adf1046
Saelens W, Cannoodt R, Todorov H, Saeys Y. 2019. A comparison of single-
cell trajectory inference methods. Nat Biotechnol 37: 547–554. doi:10
.1038/s41587-019-0071-9
Schiebinger G, Shu J, Tabaka M, Cleary B, Subramanian V, Solomon A,
Gould J, Liu S, Lin S, Berube P, et al. 2019. Optimal-transport analysis
of single-cell gene expression identifies developmental trajectories in re-
programming. Cell 176: 928–943.e22. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2019.01.006
Sha Y, Qiu Y, Zhou P, Nie Q. 2024. Reconstructing growth and dynamic tra-
jectories from single-cell transcriptomics data. Nat Mach Intell 6: 25–39.
doi:10.1038/s42256-023-00763-w
Sohn K, Lee H, Yan X. 2015. Learning structured output representation us-
ing deep conditional generative models. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 28 (NIPS 2015) (ed. Cortes C, et al.), pp.
3483–3491, Montreal. Curran Associates, Inc., Red Hook, NY.
Squair JW, Gautier M, Kathe C, Anderson MA, James ND, Hutson TH,
Hudelle R, Qaiser T, Matson KJ, Barraud Q, et al. 2021. Confronting false
discoveries in single-cell differential expression. Nat Commun 12: 5692.
doi:10.1038/s41467-021-25960-2
Syrett CM, Sindhava V, Sierra I, Dubin AH, Atchison M, Anguera MC. 2019.
Diversity of epigenetic features of the inactive X-chromosome in NK
cells, dendritic cells, and macrophages. Front Immunol 9: 3087. doi:10
.3389/fimmu.2018.03087
Tanay A, Regev A. 2017. Scaling single-cell genomics from phenomenology
to mechanism. Nature 541: 331–338. doi:10.1038/nature21350
Tong A, Huang J, Wolf G, van Dijk D, Krishnaswamy S. 2020. TrajectoryNet:
a dynamic optimal transport network for modeling cellular dynamics.
Proc Mach Learn Res 119: 9526–9536.
Trapnell C, Cacchiarelli D, Grimsby J, Pokharel P, Li S, Morse M, Lennon NJ,
Livak KJ, Mikkelsen TS, Rinn JL. 2014. The dynamics and regulators of
cell fate decisions are revealed by pseudotemporal ordering of single
cells. Nat Botechnol 32: 381–386. doi:10.1038/nbt.2859
Verbeek JS, Hirose S, Nishimura H. 2019. The complex association of FcγRiib
with autoimmune susceptibility. Front Immunol 10: 2061. doi:10.3389/
fimmu.2019.02061
Woicik A, Zhang M, Chan J, Ma J, Wang S. 2023. Extrapolating heteroge-
neous time-series gene expression data using Sagittarius. Nat Mach
Intell 5: 699–713. doi:10.1038/s42256-023-00679-5
Wu AP, Singh R, Walsh CA, Berger B. 2025. Unveiling causal regulatory
mechanisms through cell-state parallax. Nat Commun 16: 8096. doi:10
.1038/s41467-025-61337-5
Yang X, Schadt EE, Wang S, Wang H, Arnold AP, Ingram-Drake L, Drake TA,
Lusis AJ. 2006. Tissue-specific expression and regulation of sexually
dimorphic genes in mice. Genome Res 16: 995–1004. doi:10.1101/gr
.5217506
Yeo GHT, Saksena SD, Gifford DK. 2021. Generative modeling of single-
cell time series with PRESCIENT enables prediction of cell trajectories
with interventions. Nat Commun 12: 3222. doi:10.1038/s41467-021-
23518-w
Zhang J, Larschan E, Bigness J, Singh R. 2024a. scNODE: generative model
for temporal single cell transcriptomic data prediction. Bioinformatics
40: ii146–ii154. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btae393
Zhang K, Zhu J, Kong D, Zhang Z. 2024b. Modeling single cell trajectory us-
ing forward-backward stochastic differential equations. PLoS Comput
Biol 20: e1012015. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1012015
Zhou D, Yu X, Yu K, Ren Y, Yang K, Wang X, Wang Q. 2023. Integrated anal-
ysis identifies upregulated SAMD9L as a potential biomarker correlating
with the severity of primary Sjögren ’s syndrome. J Inflamm Res 16:
3725–3738. doi:10.2147/JIR.S413581
Received September 9, 2024; accepted in revised form August 1, 2025.
Temporal profile inference in mouse development
Genome Research 2351
www.genome.org